"Standing":  Standing-wave thermoacoustic refrigerator and engine animation. 10/96, 6/98, 5/14 gws.

First frame shows a central cross section of a long resonator,
with plots of pressure and velocity of the fundamental mode 
in the resonator.  Lines in the gas in the resonator show how 
elements of gas move in the standing wave.  Imagine tracer particles.

Second frame adds a stack, partway between velocity node and pressure
node.  

We must look more closely to see the details of thermoacoustic action.
Yellow circle in third frame shows region of interest, which is
magnified below, where short fragments of two plates in the stack are
shown.

Fourth frame adds a highlighted typical parcel of gas, which
moves back and forth, its volume changing in response to pressure
and its temperature.  [Note: We are neglecting viscosity throughout
this animation.]

From here on, you can select the order of display by typing the first
letter of any of the words displayed at the bottom of the screen.  I 
will assume that you hit the keys in the following order:  (f)lat, (f)lat, 
(r)efrigerator, (c)ritical, (e)ngine, (q)uit.

Fifth frame plots pressure against volume of the parcel of gas we are
inspecting.  As in animation "thermal", the oscillations are hysteretic;
the standing wave is doing work on the parcel of gas.

To aid in understanding the cause of the hysteresis, sixth frame shows
temperature of the parcel (as function of its position; blue trace) and 
that of the nearby plate in the stack (white line). When the gas is hotter 
than the plate, heat flows (shown as red arrows) go from gas to plate;  
when the gas is cooler, the heat flows go inn the other direction.  Magnitude
of heat, proportional to temperature difference between gas and plate, is
indicated by width of red arrows.  Note that most of the parcel temperature
is just due to adiabatic pressure oscillation;  thermal contact with the
plate modifies this slightly, opening up a little area in the temperature-
vs-location loop.  Note also that, from the point of view of the plate,
the parcel of gas picks up heat from one area, and deposits it in an area 
farther to the left.  A sort of right-to-left heat transfer mechanism,
performed by all parcels of gas in the stack.

Seventh frame shows that the processes of the seventh frame are qualitatively
unchanged if a slight temperature gradient exists along the plates of the
stack.  The parcel of gas absorbs PV work from the standing wave, and the 
parcel moves heat from right to left along the plates, from cooler to
warmer regions of the stack.  This is a thermoacoustic refrigerator.  We
have added a heat exchanger at each end of the stack, indicating the need
for a means of heat transfer between stack ends and the outside world in
order to make this a useful refrigerator.

Eighth frame shows what happens if the temperature gradient along the
stack is a little steeper, so that it matches the temperature profile
of the gas parcel as it moves adiabatically in the standing wave.  No
temperature difference between parcel and plate;  hence no heat transfer;
hence no work either.  The PV trace is now simply an adiabat.  This is
called the critical temperature gradient.

Ninth frame shows what happens if the temperature gradient along the 
stack is even steeper.  The signs of everything--temperature differences,
heat flows, work--are opposite from what they were for the refrigerator.
This is a thermoacoustic engine (or "prime mover"), in which the parcel of
gas does work on the standing wave, and heat is carried down the temperature
gradient.
