Thermal penetration depth animation (rev October 1996, rev May 2014)

First frame shows a central cross section of a long resonator,
with plots of pressure and velocity of the fundamental mode 
in the resonator.

Second frame adds lines in the gas in the resonator, showing how 
elements of gas move in the standing wave.  Imagine tracer particles.
Also displays temperature throughout the resonator instead of
velocity.

But this temperature plot shows a nonzero oscillating temperature at 
the walls, which is not true if the walls are massive and hence have
substantial heat capacity.  This coarse view has assumed a negligibly 
small thermal penetration depth. (or perfectly insulating walls!)  
Yellow circles in third frame show region to be magnified in the 
next frame.

Fourth frame shows solution to 2-dimensional heat-transfer equation, 
in low-amplitude approximation, assuming these boundary conditions:  
an isothermal, stationary wall at the left side, and uniform oscillating 
pressure with no motion of the gas in the vertical direction. 
Each horizontal tic mark is one thermal penetration depth.
The moving, wavy line is the temperature in the gas as a function of
position and time.  The moving horizontal line is the pressure, and the
moving vertical lines are tracer-particle lines in the gas.

The pressure oscillations in this thermal boundary layer are lossy;  the
"spring" of the compressible gas is hysteretic, because the adiabatic and
isothermal compressibilities are different.  To see this, imagine in the 
fifth frame that one of the tracer lines is replaced by a piston, and
ask how much work does that piston do on all the gas to its left.  

The work per cycle is the cyclic integral of pressure times differential
in volume p dV.  Since the intersection of the pressure line and the 
piston-face line mark pressure and volume at each instant of time, the area 
traced out by that intersection, shown in the sixth frame, is the desired 
integral.  Direction of rotation around the loop gives the sign of the work.

We could have put our imaginary piston at some other location, and obtained
a different value for the work done on all gas to its left.  Bottom trace 
in the seventh frame shows that work as a function of location of the
imaginary piston.

The derivative of that work with respect to y is displayed in the eighth 
frame. This shows the dissipation per unit volume as a function of y.  It is
greatest about one thermal penetration depth from the wall, which is where
the gas is farthest from both of the two ideal, reversible cases: adiabatic
and isothermal oscillations.  Note also the interesting fact that the gas 
roughly 4 penetration depths from the surface does work on its 
surroundings, rather than dissipating work.
